Add Felix calc-graph and dataplane design docs (#12977)
projectcalico/calico: felix/design/dataplane.md

roles are tightly coupled. When you can, prefer the split: let a
driver absorb the resync complexity behind a declarative
"here is the desired state" API and keep the manager simple (see
[Restart, resync and mark-and-sweep](#restart-resync-and-mark-and-sweep)).

### Review notes for this section

- A new feature that programs kernel state belongs in a manager
  (conversion) and, if it needs reconciliation, a driver — not
  smeared across the event loop. Prefer the declarative
  manager + reconciling driver split; reach for the integrated
  `bpfEndpointManager` style only when the coupling is genuinely
  irreducible.

## The OnUpdate / apply() split

Every manager implements the `Manager` interface
(`dataplane/linux/int_dataplane.go`):

```go
type Manager interface {
    OnUpdate(protoBufMsg any)
    CompleteDeferredWork() error
}
```

(Extended interfaces: `ManagerWithRouteTables`,
`ManagerWithRouteRules` expose route syncers to the loop;
`UpdateBatchResolver` lets a manager resolve cross-manager state
before any programming begins.)

**`OnUpdate` must be cheap and must not perform kernel I/O** (no
netlink call, `iptables-restore`, subprocess fork, or BPF map

> write). The rule is narrower than "don't touch the dataplane": it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
write). It
```

Reviewer: (don't think the deleted phrase adds anything)

exactly this via `AddMembers`/`UpdateChain`). The pattern: stash the
message and **mark the affected resources dirty**; all reconciliation
and kernel mutation happen later in `CompleteDeferredWork()`, walking
the dirty set.

Why the split:

1. **Batching is far cheaper.** Many operations cost the same for one
   change or many — legacy iptables ships the *whole* ruleset to
   userspace and back per change; an IP-set update forks a
   subprocess. Doing the heavy work once per `apply()` over a
   coalesced batch (Felix throttles `apply()` under load so batches
   grow) is the difference between keeping up and not.
2. **It separates safe-anytime work from must-wait work.** In-memory
   updates are safe before in-sync; touching the kernel is not (see
   [resync](#restart-resync-and-mark-and-sweep)).

### Review notes for this section

- Any kernel access (netlink call, `iptables-restore`, subprocess
  fork, BPF map write) in an `OnUpdate` is a bug. It belongs in
  `CompleteDeferredWork`. Flag it.
- `OnUpdate` that does work proportional to anything other than the
  size of the single message is suspect — the point is to be cheap

>   and defer.

Reviewer: Hm.  liveMigrationMonitor does a few not-obviously-non-blocking things in OnUpdate.  Might need to review that.

  a failure programming one resource must not abort the rest. If
  programming route A fails, still attempt B, C, D; keep A dirty;
  retry on the next cycle. Most drivers work this way.
- **Block when continuing would violate a dependency or a security
  interlock.** Sometimes you *must* stop: if resource A can't be
  programmed and the next manager will program something that
  depends on A — or proceeding out of order would break a security
  interlock (e.g. opening traffic before its policy is in place) —
  the loop has to hold off rather than press on.
- **Fail closed, and ultimately panic, where limping on is
  dangerous.** It is not safe to keep running if `*tables`
  programming **consistently** fails, because that can leave the
  node open. After retries are exhausted, Felix gives up and
  panics rather than run indefinitely in an unknown, possibly
  insecure state.

### Refresh timers vs error-triggered resync

These are distinct mechanisms with overlapping effect:

- **Error-triggered resync**: a failed `apply()` leaves work dirty
  and re-runs soon. The re-run is paced by the leaky-bucket
  `applyThrottle` (with a ~10s `retryTicker` as a backstop), not by

>   exponential backoff; true exponential backoff exists only *inside*

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  exponential backoff; exponential backoff is only used *inside*
```

| nftables (`nftables/`) | Inherited the iptables hash/prefix approach for porting ease, but doesn't strictly need it: **if it's in our table, it's ours.** A future simplification. |
| ip rules (`routerule/`) | No marking support. Identified by **the tables they jump to being Felix-owned**. Imperfect — a config change can confuse it. |
| routes (`routetable/`) | Heuristic, because the first implementation didn't uniformly use the route `proto` field (it should have): **in a Felix-owned table ⇒ ours; carries our proto ⇒ ours; points down a `cali`-owned veth ⇒ ours**; etc. The classifier is the `OwnershipPolicy` interface — `MainTableOwnershipPolicy.RouteIsOurs`/`IfaceIsOurs` in `routetable/ownershippol/`. (Not to be confused with `RouteClass`, which is a same-CIDR conflict tie-breaker among *desired* routes, not an ownership test.) |
| IP sets, iptables chains, veths | Identified by **name prefix** (`cali`...). |

### Review notes for this section

> - **The headline review question for any PR that creates new

Reviewer: Again, I agree this is important, but I don't think it's the headline.

> - **The headline review question for any PR that creates new

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- **A key review question for any PR that creates new
```

  dataplane state:** "How does a freshly-restarted Felix, with no
  memory and possibly a totally different datastore, recognise this
  as ours to sweep — with no delete event and no prior state?" If
  the PR doesn't answer it, it has a latent leak across restart.
  The menu of mechanisms is the table above (hash-comment /
  owned-table / owned-proto / name-prefix); pick one and wire in
  the read-back.
- A change that makes a driver mutate the kernel before in-sync
  defeats the deferred-cleanup safety and risks deleting
  not-yet-seen state.

### Fail closed while Felix isn't running

Recognising "our" resources is not only about cleanup — it is also
**security-critical**, because the dataplane has to keep doing the
right thing in the windows when Felix is **down, restarting, or
behind**. The motivating race:

- Calc-graph updates can be delayed (Felix busy, restarting, or
  crashed).
- The CNI plugin creates a new workload's `cali*` veth and plugs in
  the pod **before** that endpoint round-trips through the datastore
  back to Felix — so for a moment the interface exists but Felix has

>   no policy for it.

Reviewer: Perhaps I am misunderstanding, but how can this possibly be a matter for Felix?  ISTM the CNI plugin has to ensure that the new workload is fail-closed when it creates it.

Author: Right now, CNI plugin relies on felix having already programmed the "drop traffic to/from unknown veths" rule.

If the dataplane defaulted to "allow unknown interfaces" that pod

> would have open connectivity until Felix caught up. Instead it

Reviewer: Not following.  What do you imagine "allow unknown interfaces" to mean?  Presumably we also don't want Felix to delete a cali interface that it hasn't heard about yet.

Author: "allow traffic to/from unknown interfaces"

**fails closed**: the iptables/nftables dispatch chains (the
[dispatch trie/map](#rules-generation-dispatch-chains-and-mark-bits))

> **drop any `cali*` interface that isn't explicitly allow-listed**.

Reviewer: OK, this makes sense now.  The text would be clearer if everything from "If the dataplane" to "**fails closed**" was replaced by just "Therefore".

  from one backend, ⇒ a design decision to agree, not a default.
  Expect more nftables-only (and BPF-only) features over time.
- nftables is gradually migrating to **nft-native constructs**
  (e.g. match-action maps) for performance/scale wins, leaving
  iptables users no worse off.

### Review notes for this section

- A PR adding `*tables` rule semantics must first decide the
  iptables/nftables story explicitly (both? nft-only? — see above),
  and should carry FV coverage in the relevant mode(s)
  (`make fv` and/or `make fv-nft`).
- A change to how rules are hashed or how Calico rules are
  recognised touches the restart/resync identification mechanism —
  review it against [mark-and-sweep](#restart-resync-and-mark-and-sweep),
  not just the happy path.

## Rules generation, dispatch chains and mark bits

[`felix/rules/`](../rules/) is the `*tables` rule-rendering layer: it
converts lists of Calico-internal rules/endpoints/etc into concrete
`*tables` rules.

- **Dispatch chains avoid O(n-endpoints) per-packet cost.**
  Evaluating an iptables rule costs on the order of a microsecond
  (rough estimate; no in-repo benchmark), so a flat chain of 100+

>   per-endpoint dispatch rules is a real per-packet tax. Felix builds

Reviewer: Is it really per-packet?  I would hope that our conntrack state shortcut occurs before any dispatch chain - so per-connection instead of per-packet.

Reviewer: More "per-packet"s below - please check and correct them all.

Author: It really is per packet.  Originally, we short-circuited earlier but that caused problems for folks with non-Calico rules; our solution was to move the conntrack accept to the per-endpoint chain.

  a **shallow (typically single-level) tree of dispatch chains**,
  binning endpoints by the next character after the common
  interface-name prefix (`sortAndDivideEndpointNamesToPrefixTree` /
  `buildSingleDispatchChainTree` in `rules/dispatch.go`): roughly one
  branch per distinct next-character rather than one rule per
  endpoint. This is the `*tables` analogue of the BPF fast-path
  discipline: keep per-packet work sub-linear in the number of local
  endpoints. The dispatch chains also **fail closed**: a `cali*`
  interface that isn't in the trie is dropped, which is the
  security-critical default that protects not-yet-known workloads
  (see [Fail closed while Felix isn't running](#fail-closed-while-felix-isnt-running)).
- **Mark-bit allocation.** Marks are a scarce, shared resource.
  `MarkBitsManager` (`felix/markbits/`, e.g. `NextSingleBitMark`)
  allocates bits for `*tables` modes from the configured range. (BPF
  uses a *fixed*, congested range whose individual bits are managed
  in a BPF header file — see the BPF design family.) An allocation
  that exhausts the range, or collides with bits another subsystem

>   expects, is a startup/runtime failure.

Reviewer: Worth a note here about more mark bits being used in Enterprise - so check those in advance to avoid issues at merge time.

### Review notes for this section

- A PR that adds a dispatch rule per endpoint to a flat chain
  reintroduces the linear per-packet cost the tree structure exists
  to avoid. Keep new per-endpoint matching inside the tree.
- A PR that claims a new mark bit must allocate it through
  `MarkBitsManager` against the configured range, and must not
  assume a specific bit is free.

## IP sets

[`felix/ipsets/`](../ipsets/) reconciles kernel IP sets against
desired membership. Three behaviours look odd until you know the
kernel constraints behind them:

> - **Temp-set-and-swap.** Atomically changing the size/metadata of an

Reviewer: size = number of entries, or capacity?

Author: capacity

  **in-use** IP set is only possible by building a temporary set and
  swapping it in. That's why updates that change set parameters go
  via a temp set.
- **Deletions are deferred until after `*tables` updates.** You
  cannot delete an in-use IP set, so a set being removed must first
  have every referencing rule removed — which the `apply()` ordering
  (delete IP sets *after* `*tables`) guarantees.
- **Deletions are rate-limited/queued** because each `ipset destroy`
  is surprisingly slow (~40ms) and serialised in the kernel: Felix
  caps deletions per iteration (`MaxIPSetDeletionsPerIteration = 1`,
  rescheduling with a ~100ms floor), so a big policy teardown of
  thousands of sets doesn't stall the whole dataplane on cleanup.

**The cross-layer invariant: never reference an IP set before it is

> programmed.** This is enforced jointly across two layers, and a

Reviewer: Unclear to me if "two layers" means the calc graph and the dataplane, or the manager and a driver in the dataplane.  Please just say exactly what you mean.

> change to *either* alone breaks it silently:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
change to *either* alone breaks it:
```

Reviewer: (I assume it would be very much not silent - probably a panic in the logs)

## Windows (contrast)

Windows has its own dataplane (`dataplane/windows/`) and a full
design is out of scope here, but it's worth recording what carries
over and what doesn't, because it sharpens the Linux model:

- **What's the same:** the overall architecture. Windows still defers
  programming until in-sync, still aims for minimal-disruption
  reconciliation, still resyncs at start of day.
- **What differs:** the HCN/HNS dataplane has **no IP-set
  primitive**, so the Calico IP-set model doesn't fit. The
  Calico→kernel conversion that on Linux is split across managers and
  drivers is instead done by **calc-graph-like flattening functions
  inside the Windows dataplane**, converting policies + IP sets into
  fully-flattened HCN rules. It's isolated there deliberately.
- **A sharp edge:** the HCN dataplane causes **traffic disruption on
  *any* rule change**, so the "don't flap already-correct resources
  on resync" rule (below) matters even more on Windows than on
  Linux.

## How to write a manager (and common failure modes)

The recurring ways dataplane changes go wrong, and the recipe that
avoids most of them.

**Start simple: dirty-flag + start-of-day resync.** For a

> low-traffic manager, don't reach for edge-triggered cleverness.

Reviewer: What is "edge-triggered"?

Author: It's an analogy to electronics design, it means responding to every change in a signal rather than, say, polling a signal once in a while and responding to its current state.  Agree, better to be concrete and explain what is meant given the analogy doesn't seem to be well known.

<!--
Copyright (c) 2026 Tigera, Inc. All rights reserved.

Licensed under the Apache License, Version 2.0 (the "License");
you may not use this file except in compliance with the License.
You may obtain a copy of the License at

    http://www.apache.org/licenses/LICENSE-2.0

Unless required by applicable law or agreed to in writing, software
distributed under the License is distributed on an "AS IS" BASIS,
WITHOUT WARRANTIES OR CONDITIONS OF ANY KIND, either express or implied.
See the License for the specific language governing permissions and
limitations under the License.
-->

> # Felix dataplane — Design

Author: The ambiguity is real, but "(non-BPF)" would be the wrong fix: Felix's Linux dataplane is a single `InternalDataplane` codebase switched between iptables/nftables/**eBPF** modes, and this doc deliberately owns the architecture **shared by all three** (manager/driver model, main loop, `apply()` cycle, resync doctrine) plus the `*tables`-specific parts. eBPF reuses that shared architecture and fans out to the `bpf-*` family only for its packet path/maps/managers. Retitled to "Felix Linux dataplane — Design" and rewrote the scope intro to make the shared-vs-`*tables`-specific split explicit, with reciprocal pointers between this doc and bpf-overview.md (commit 2d783ae).

## Layer roles

Felix is split into a calc graph and a dataplane, and the dataplane
is itself split into managers and drivers.

- **Calc graph** ([`calc-graph.md`](./calc-graph.md)) filters and
  massages cluster-wide datastore state into the desired state of
  *this node's* dataplane, expressed in **Calico-internal terms**
  (local WEPs, abstract policy rules, fully-resolved IP sets). It is
  effectively a pure, incremental function of datastore state.

- **Managers** (`dataplane/linux/*_mgr.go`) take that Calico-internal
  desired state and **convert it into this dataplane's terms**
  (iptables/nftables rules, IP set contents, routes — or, in the BPF
  dataplane, BPF map entries; or, on Windows, HNS policy). This
  conversion is the manager layer's defining job.

- **Drivers** (`iptables/`, `nftables/`, `ipsets/`, `routetable/`,
  `routerule/`, `vxlanfdb/`) own the job of **bringing the actual
  kernel state into sync with the desired state** — reading back
  what's there, computing a minimal delta, and applying it. Some
  managers do this reconciliation themselves; others delegate it to
  a driver and stay purely declarative.

> 

Author: One more minor aspect of the dataplane: status reporting back into the datastore.  this is mainly for openstack, but recently we added a file-based local status reporter that can signal to the CNI plugin "felix has programmed this workload's veth correctly" in order to make sure the CNI plugin delays pod startup until dataplane is ready.

Author: Added as dataplane job (e) in 2d783ae: status reporting into the datastore (WorkloadEndpointStatus, mainly OpenStack) plus the file-based local reporter that gates CNI pod start-up until the veth is programmed.

  size of the single message is suspect — the point is to be cheap
  and defer.

## The apply() event loop

`InternalDataplane.apply()` (`dataplane/linux/int_dataplane.go`) is
the throttled reconciliation cycle. The message-receive loop fans
each protobuf message out to every manager's `OnUpdate`, then
schedules an `apply()`; under load, applies are rate-limited so
messages coalesce into bigger batches.

`apply()` runs in a deliberate order, because dataplane resources
have dependencies on each other — most importantly **iptables rules
reference IP sets**, and the kernel refuses both to create a rule
referencing an unknown IP set and to delete an in-use IP set. The
order is:

1. Clear `dataplaneNeedsSync`; it will be re-set if anything fails.
2. **Resolution pass** — give every manager (via
   `UpdateBatchResolver`) a chance to resolve cross-manager state
   from the batch. This can produce an update from one manager to
   another (e.g. an endpoint manager telling the BPF endpoint
   manager about a HEP) that **must** land before either starts
   programming.
3. **Programming pass** — call `CompleteDeferredWork()` on every
   manager.

> 4. **XDP** — handled inline right after the programming pass (not a

Author: This sounds like Felix's legacy XDP support, which runs as an extension to iptables mode.  This is no longer being enhanced; Felix now has a "proper" BPX dataplane, including XDP untracked policy support.

Author: Added a note in 2d783ae clarifying this is Felix's *legacy* iptables-mode XDP (xdpState), no longer enhanced, and pointing at the BPF dataplane for the modern XDP path.

Felix created but the new datastore no longer wants.

Two consequences fall out of this:

1. **Cleanup is deferred until in-sync.** The dataplane does not
   touch the kernel until it receives the first datastore in-sync
   signal, and the first `apply()` after that is what triggers
   cleanup. If it swept earlier it would delete state it simply
   hadn't been told about yet. (This is why the calc graph must
   never fabricate in-sync — see
   [`calc-graph.md` → In-sync semantics](./calc-graph.md#in-sync-semantics).)
   Several drivers are architected so the *first* `Apply()`/resync
   call performs the read-back-and-reconcile.
2. **Every driver must identify its own resources.** To mark-and-
   sweep — keep what's still wanted, delete the orphans — a driver
   must be able to look at the live kernel state and decide "this
   one is mine and unwanted" **without** the original datastore
   state and **without** a delete edge-trigger.

Therefore: **any feature that creates a new kind of kernel resource
must, up front, design how a freshly-restarted Felix will recognise
that resource as Calico's, for later cleanup.** This is a
first-class design question, not an afterthought.

> ### How each subsystem identifies "ours"

Author: Not sure where it belongs, but there's a place where the "ours" calculation is important for security:
- Updates from the calc graph may be delayed
- CNI plugin creates a new WEP interface before that information gets written back to the datastore and round trips to felix
- We want to ffail closed, even for an unknown WEP interface and even if FElix is down.
Solution: the iptables / nftables dispatch rules drop any `cali*` interface that isn't allow-listed as part of the dispatch trie/map.  Always think about what happens if felix crashes / stops at a given point, how do we make sure that existing traffic keeps flowing and anything that we can't secure propoerly fails closed.

Author: Added a new subsection 'Fail closed while Felix isn't running' in 2d783ae: the CNI-race / Felix-down scenario, the dispatch trie default-dropping unknown cali* interfaces, and the general 'what if Felix crashes at this exact point' doctrine. Also cross-linked it from the dispatch-chains section.
